Hello and welcome back.
In this lecture I'd like to talk about the interface segregation principle
this principle as defined by Robert S. Martin.
We talked about him in our last lecture he's a big pioneer of object going to design.
He was consulting for Xerox to help them build the software for the new printer systems the formal definition
of this principle as clients should not be forced to depend upon interfaces that they do not use apply
should not implement an interface if it does not use a method in the interface.
So previously we're talking about how interfaces are necessary for software reuse and you can use inheritance
for that but we also talked about interfaces don't this I need to be cohesive but having said that you
shouldn't have 50 methods interface shouldn't have 10 in 10 methods an interface because all subclass
all classes and implement that interface have to implement all the methods.
So this principle comes down to cohesiveness for an interface.
You don't want to force clients to implement methods that they don't use.
This happens mostly when one interface contains more than one functionality and the client only needs
one functionality and not the other can segregate those interfaces so the goal of this principle is
to reduce the side effects and frequency of required changes the way that you avoid this is you split
the software into multiple independent parts multiple interfaces.
This is a common theme that I've been mentioning frequently is you have to be adaptive to change you
when you make a change you don't want to have to make it in 50 classes by not following this principle.
You have to change quite a bit and all the clients that implement that interface
and interface design is very tricky job because once you release your interface you really can't change
it.
You can't if you if you will but you'll end up breaking all the implementation especially in Java right.
Because in Java with the keyword interface that means you have to implement all the methods in the interface
before any class can use it.
So if you follow this principle in Java you'll end up implementing last methods because each interface
will have a single functionality will be very highly cohesive right.
And then when you release your interface you won't have to change it as much if you have an interface
with many methods it's not cohesive that's has all sorts of different functions or methods in it you're
forcing all your clients to implement that.
And when you add a new method to that interface now all the clients also have to have it.
So there are many advantages to this principle.
For example suppose there is a system which has multiple functionalities in various clients using those
functionalities.
Normally you create an API you implement it with the job interface keyword pretty straightforward if
you just created one interface.
All the clients will have to unnecessarily implement all the other clients methods just to make that
interface compile and what this is known as it's known as a fat interface right.
This is an object oriented designer's nightmare that makes the overall design very rigid due to the
enormous effort required to manage changes across all the clients when making a change to a method pertaining
only to one client.
You can see this very clearly of an interface has 10 methods.
One of the clients only needs to use a couple those methods.
It's forced to implement all the methods.
Basically just stub them out.
And now when you make a change to the interface you have to modify all these clients and some of the
clients don't even care about those changes.
Now if you had the interface a segregated and you made a change to that interface you would have to
make last changes to the client's just make sense.
So again it's about isolation.
It's about high cohesion.
It's it's about not having something do more than what it's responsible for so this sounds a lot like
other principles that we talked about.
And I'll mention how they're a little bit different.
But one of the things this principle does is it avoids design drawbacks associated with this fat interface.
Basically it will refactor that fat interface into multiple segregated interfaces and then each separate
interface will be a lean interface that will only contain the methods which are required for a specific
client.
Having said all that that does it mean that every interface should only have one method that will make
sense that will not be efficient you just want to have make sure the interface is designed for particular
clients.
And I'll go through an example that demonstrates that a clean interface will basically Cadel cater to
consumers of a specific type of functionality or a specific set of customers all of whom have the same
functional leads.
So you design the interface based on the customer based on the client what the client's needs are so
at this point let's demonstrate the use of this principle in intelligence.
As an example
when I bring up until Jay again you know the drill.
We're gonna do another shaped type of example because shapes are a good way to demonstrate a lot of
these principles because they have many subclasses and many different types.
So we're gonna create a shape interface.
I will name this example integration into actually interface or interface segregation principle into
face segregation.
Example 1 because we're gonna have another example after this
so we'll create the shape interface that's going to represent all sorts of different types of shapes.
The interface is initially going to contain a couple methods.
It's going to contain method for area and a method for calculating value volume.
So we'll name a shape interface.
We'll put these two methods in here both return doubles will say area in public double value.
All right.
And so we know that that because this is an interface every shape will need to implement this interface
however if you look at the shape interface it's not necessarily designed for clients or for different
types of shapes for example squares or flash shapes they don't have volumes this interface would force
all the square classes to implement a method that it has no use for because it doesn't have a volume.
So this interface by itself actually violates the interface segregation principle.
So a better idea would be to create a different interface that only pertains to solid shapes and then
the solid shape interface can implement the volume method so solid shapes like cubes can use this method.
So let's go ahead and do that.
Let's create another interface and again we'll name this solid shape interface
and we'll put the will basically put the volume method in here and we'll take it out of our shape interface.
All right.
And then we'll have a couple classes that implement each one.
So Axl does have one class will input we'll create our cube class that implements both of these interfaces.
Nice feature Java a way around multiple inheritance so this supplement the shape interface.
And this will implement the solid shape interface right and we'll have to implement these two methods
that basically just have no really use other than being stubbed out more or less calculate surface of
the area.
Now Java requires us to return a double so we'll just say 1.0 and for volume return 1.0.
Okay so now this is a better approach right.
Because we separated the Sol tape interface from the shape interface volume and area are separated.
So now if we had a square we would only implement the solid tape interface.
So it's a bit better but there is still a problem because now we're coupled to the type of shape we
saw a couple to the type of shape with these two interfaces so a better approach would actually create
another interface.
A man and shape interface where we can implement both the flat and solid shapes and then we can have
a single API for all clients for managing the shapes.
So let me show you what I mean by that.
Add another interface
manage shape interface
and this will have a public double calculate method.
We'll still have our cube which implements the shape interface and it actually will implement the manage
interface as well.
It will implement the double in the volume but it will also implement this calculate
and what this will do is it will just call the area in volume method so return this dot area plus this
dot volume.
And then we can also create another class only in this one square and this will implement only what
it needs to.
It doesn't have a volume so we'll just implement shape and manage
and so we'll have the area implemented.
So just copy this area implement and just say it's too hard coded.
Get rid of this comments it's not relevant and we'll also implement the calculate method in the calculus
method.
We'll just call the area method.
So here.
Public double calculate
we'll just return the area method.
All right.
And so do you notice here the benefits all the client sees is the its shape interface they can see the
man a cheap interface they can create different ounces of solider shape interfaces so they could create
a cube or a square but all they do is they call calculate the calculate Well then call the methods necessary
the volume or the area there's no coupling to the type of shape it's completely independent.
And so this is a good example of SEC separating interfaces so that you don't force clients to use every
single method that it doesn't need to.
So that's the first example of our interface segregation principle.
Let's look at one more.
So let me create another project.
This example is just going to demonstrate a restaurant and so we'll just do the usual.
I'm gonna call this interface segregation.
Example 2.
In this example I'm going to simulate or demonstrate the concept of a restaurant interface.
The restaurant interface is going to have all sorts of different methods for accepting orders from online
customers dial in or telephone customers walk in customer orders.
It's also going to handle payments either online payments or in-person payments so it's going to be
named restaurant interface
and I'm going to copy and paste here for efficiency but it's going to contain six methods.
And you'll know that you should notice right right off the bat when you look at this interface it kind
of is separated and it's not separating the grouping right.
It's really has the concept of ordering telephone order an online order and then it also has the concept
of poor customer order walking.
It also has the concept of paying but anyways we have this nice interface that has five methods.
Like I said six five methods so we can start to implement this interface.
Let's say we have a client and online client so we'll create a an online client simple impulse and implementation
that's a common suffix that you use on some class names.
This is going to implement the restaurant interface.
And so now I have to actually implement all the methods and interface.
So again copy and paste here for efficiency but what you'll notice is this is an online customer yet
they have to actually implement all of these methods that they're never going to use or never get invoked
right.
They're online so they're only going to need to place orders online in pay for orders online.
So they'll use this one.
This take telephone order doesn't make sense.
Paying online they'll use block in custom order doesn't make sense paying person doesn't make sense.
It's basically three out of the five methods are not applicable here they're wasted right.
The online client improv class here is used for online orders.
It's not used for these other walking orders.
You could have clients for those other order types such as walk in clients or a telephone client and
they would only implement the method specific to them.
A walk in client would implement the walk in customer order or the pay in person.
Right.
So again you see a lot of waste here because all five methods are part of the restaurant interface.
All the clients have to implement them.
Now you could get around it or make it a little bit cleaner by the methods are not actually implemented.
You could throw some kind of unsupported operation exception.
Still it's code that you have to add and also any change in any of the methods of the interface.
Now is gonna be propagated to all of the implementation classes all the clients the online clients the
paying person clients telephone clients regardless with that method even pertains to that.
So this is an example where the this restaurant interface is breaking the segregate integrated interface
segregation principle it's all.
It also breaks a single responsibility principle.
Because what do you notice here.
This restaurant interface has many responsibilities.
It's basically two responsibilities.
Again taking orders and paying it would be much better to separate this interface to have logics for
payments as well as logics for orders and group them together that way.
It doesn't make sense to put it in a single interface.
So if we apply the interface segregation principle to this example what we would probably do is we would
separate out the payment functions so we'd separate out pay online pay in person and we would separate
those out to a payment interface who would also separate out the orders in order methods into an order
interface.
And then each of the clients can use one implementation of either the payment interface or the order
face.
So for example the online client would use the online payment email and the online order email in each
client would only use what they need if we designed that way.
The Single Responsibility Principle will now be adhered to because the payment interface the order interfaces
would be separate and that would depend.
That would be based on their client specific implementations.
It would also allow us when we have any change in any order any of the order or payment or faces.
They're not going to affect one another.
They're completely independent so you can see the benefits here of separation.
And again it is similar to some of the other principles where you want to make your interfaces cohesive
so that you don't have all these clients implementing methods that they do not use.